<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Wedding of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-38-first-story" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">First Story</h3>
				<p>There was once on a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to try her. He stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved as if he were stone dead. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox went up to her room, shut herself in, and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking. When it became known that the old fox was dead, wooers presented themselves. The maid heard some one standing at the house-door, knocking. She went and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“What may you be about, Miss Cat?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do you sleep or do you wake?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>She answered,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“I am not sleeping, I am waking,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wouldst thou know what I am making?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am boiling warm beer with butter so nice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will the gentleman enter and drink some likewise?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“No, thank you, miss,” said the fox, “what is <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox doing?” The maid replied,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“She sits all alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And makes her moan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Weeping her little eyes quite red,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox is dead.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like to woo her.” “Certainly, young sir.”</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Mistress Fox, are you inside?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Oh yes, my little cat,” she cried.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“A wooer he stands at the door out there.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Tell me what he is like, my dear?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“But has he nine as beautiful tails as the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox?” “Oh, no,” answered the cat, “he has only one.”</p>
				<p>“Then I will not have him.” Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away. Soon afterwards there was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first. After this still more came, each with one tail more than the other, but they were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox. When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“Now open the gates and doors all wide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And carry old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox outside.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox stirred under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox out of the house.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-38-second-story" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Second Story</h3>
				<p>When old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox was dead, the wolf came as a wooer, and knocked at the door, and the cat who was servant to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox, opened it for him. The wolf greeted her, and said,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“Good day, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cat of Kehrewit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“How comes it that alone you sit?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What are you making good?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The cat replied,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will the gentleman please come in and eat?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“No, thank you, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cat,” answered the wolf. “Is <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox not at home?”</p>
				<p>The cat said,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“She sits upstairs in her room,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bewailing her sorrowful doom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bewailing her trouble so sore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox is no more.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The wolf answered,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“If she’s in want of a husband now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then will it please her to step below?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The cat runs quickly up the stair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lets her tail fly here and there,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until she comes to the parlour door.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With her five gold rings at the door she knocks,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Are you within, good Mistress Fox?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If you’re in want of a husband now,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then will it please you to step below?</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox asked, “Has the gentleman red stockings on’ and has he a pointed mouth?” “No,” answered the cat. “Then he won’t do for me.”</p>
				<p>When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and all the beasts of the forest, one after the other. But one of the good points which old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the cat had continually to send the wooers away. At length came a young fox. Then <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox said, “Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a little pointed mouth?” “Yes,” said the cat, “he has.” “Then let him come upstairs,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding-feast.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>“Sweep me the room as clean as you can,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up with the window, fling out my old man!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For many a fine fat mouse he brought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet of his wife he never thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ate up every one he caught.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Then the wedding was solemnized with young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox, and there was much rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing still.</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
